I used to commute to downtown Chicago by train every day.

At first, I enjoyed this new facet of life. Thenoveltyof the experience made it fun and exciting.

But that fresh feeling quickly washed away, turning my commute into a repetitive inconvenience.All this extra time spent getting from one place to another!

I’ll admit, at the time, it felt like a bit of a waste.

So I hurried my way through the morning commute, trying to minimize travel time. Oftentimes, I’d try to shut out the world around me by listening to a podcast.

Fast forward to this year, and it’s been months since I set foot on that train. But recently I happened to retrace the path of my former morning commute.

And instead of feeling the typical annoyances,the enjoyment and wonder of my experience blew me away!

As I boarded the train, I observed countless people living their individual lives as richly and deeply as I was living mine.

When I got off the train,sensations bombarded me from all sides:

The city wasteemingwith life! Yet somehowit felt like I was noticing this for the first time.

My experience hadtransformedfrom it’s previous state.

Seeing such familiar sights as in a new way felt like a real gift.

There’s a concept from Zen Buddhism used to describe this mindset, where everything is fresh and new. It’s called“Beginner’s Mind”and it’s the subject of this article.

“The real voyage of discovery consists not in seeking new landscapes, but in having new eyes.”~ Marcel Proust

Beginner’s Mind (aka Shoshin) is exactly what it sounds like: a term used to describe the mindset of a true beginner.

When you are new to something, you don’t know anything about it. In order to open your mind to learn, and develop understanding, you adopt a unique mindset.

In this state of mind, you are:

Just think back to what it’s like when little kids learn about something. Children areoverflowingwith questions. Their imaginations run wild. They ask both simple questions that are obvious, and profound questions that you’ve never considered.

Children are natural at this, because they’re always beginners at something. But as you get older, it’s easy to lose touch with the qualities of mind that once came so naturally.

Most people spend their lives trying to become experienced in a field, expert in a subject-area, or skilled at a craft.

Beginner’s Mind seems to run in opposition to that trajectory. Because of this, the idea can feel uncomfortable!

Why would you abandon what you know about the world, even for a moment?Isn’t it better to have expertise, knowledge, and understanding?

Experience is indeed a wonderful thing. It often helps you do things at a higher level.

But knowledge and understanding of how things work can prevent you from seeing clearly what’s in front of you.

After all…

“If your mind is empty…it is open to everything. In the beginner’s mind there are many possibilities, but in the expert’s mind there are few.”~ Shunryu Suzuki

Click To Tweet

Cultivating beginner’s mind gives you the opportunity to see the world around you with fresh eyes.

The benefits of this mindset cut across many factors of life, and contribute to:

With all those benefits in mind, you might be wondering…

“How can I start to cultivate beginner’s mind on a regular basis?”

Below are a number of practices to get you started.

When you’re used to knowing what you know, thinking like a beginner can be surprisingly challenging!

To make the process of cultivating beginner’s mind in a given scenario easier, try these 10 exercises:

Click To Tweet

“We begin with beginner’s mind, and then, if we’re lucky, we deepen it, or return to it.”~ Joseph Goldstein

At the onset of a new experience, it’s impossible not to have the mindset of a beginner.

But as time moves along, these attitudes drift away. As knowledge and understanding root themselves in your mind, your aperture of consideration narrows.

Cultivating Beginner’s Mind is a way to reverse this limiting tendency.

Seeing things anew brings fresh perspective to old sights, and opens up a world of intrigue and possibility in every day.

The best part about beginner’s mind is that it’s always accessible. Every week, every day, and every moment is an opportunity to begin again.